17
The ACOX1 gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called peroxisomal straight-chain acyl-CoA oxidase. This enzyme is found in sac-like cell structures (organelles) called peroxisomes, which contain a variety of enzymes that break down many different substances. The peroxisomal straight-chain acyl-CoA oxidase enzyme plays a role in the breakdown of certain fat molecules called very long-chain fatty acids (VLCFAs). Specifically, it is involved in the first step of a process called the peroxisomal fatty acid beta-oxidation pathway. This process shortens the VLCFA molecules by two carbon atoms at a time until the VLCFAs are converted to a molecule called acetyl-CoA, which is transported out of the peroxisomes for reuse by the cell.More than 20 ACOX1 gene mutations have been identified in people with peroxisomal acyl-CoA oxidase deficiency. These mutations prevent the peroxisomal straight-chain acyl-CoA oxidase enzyme from breaking down VLCFAs efficiently. As a result, these fatty acids accumulate in the body. It is unclear exactly how VLCFA accumulation leads to the specific features of peroxisomal acyl-CoA oxidase deficiency. However, researchers suggest that the abnormal fatty acid accumulation triggers inflammation in the nervous system that leads to the breakdown of myelin, which is the covering that protects nerves and promotes the efficient transmission of nerve impulses. Destruction of myelin leads to a loss of myelin-containing tissue (white matter) in the brain and spinal cord; loss of white matter is described as leukodystrophy. Leukodystrophy is likely involved in the development of the neurological abnormalities that occur in peroxisomal acyl-CoA oxidase deficiency.Cytogenetic Location: 17q25.1, which is the long (q) arm of chromosome 17 at position 25.1Molecular Location: base pairs 75,941,507 to 75,979,434 on chromosome 17 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: April 2014Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.