2
The AGPS gene provides instructions for making an enzyme known as alkylglycerone phosphate synthase. This enzyme is found in structures called peroxisomes, which are sac-like compartments within cells that contain enzymes needed to break down many different substances. Peroxisomes are also important for the production of fats (lipids) used in digestion and in the nervous system.Within peroxisomes, alkylglycerone phosphate synthase is responsible for a critical step in the production of lipid molecules called plasmalogens. These molecules are found in cell membranes throughout the body. They are also abundant in myelin, which is the protective substance that covers nerve cells. However, little is known about the functions of plasmalogens. Researchers suspect that these molecules may help protect cells from oxidative stress, which occurs when unstable molecules called free radicals accumulate to levels that damage or kill cells. Plasmalogens may also play important roles in interactions between lipids and proteins, the transmission of chemical signals in cells, and the fusion of cell membranes.At least three mutations in the AGPS gene have been found to cause rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata type 3 (RCDP3). These mutations change single protein building blocks (amino acids) in alkylglycerone phosphate synthase, which alters the structure of the enzyme and significantly reduces its activity. A shortage of functional alkylglycerone phosphate synthase disrupts peroxisome function and severely reduces the amount of plasmalogens within cells. It is unclear how these abnormalities lead to shortened long bones, intellectual disability, and the other characteristic features of RCDP3.Cytogenetic Location: 2q31.2, which is the long (q) arm of chromosome 2 at position 31.2Molecular Location: base pairs 177,392,743 to 177,543,836 on chromosome 2 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: July 2010Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.