19
The AMH gene provides instructions for making a protein that is involved in male sex differentiation. During development of male fetuses, the AMH protein is produced and released (secreted) by cells of the testes. The secreted protein attaches (binds) to its receptor, which is found on the surface of Mllerian duct cells. The Mllerian duct, found in both male and female fetuses, is the precursor to the female reproductive organs. Binding of the AMH protein to its receptor induces self-destruction (apoptosis) of the Mllerian duct cells. As a result, the Mllerian duct breaks down (regresses) in males. In females, who do not produce the AMH protein during fetal development, the Mllerian duct becomes the uterus and fallopian tubes.Persistent Mllerian duct syndrome type 1, a disorder of sexual development that affects males, is caused by mutations in the AMH gene. Males with this condition have female reproductive organs in addition to normal male reproductive organs. At least 38 mutations in the AMH gene have been identified in people with persistent Mllerian duct syndrome type 1. Most mutations change single protein building blocks (amino acids) in the AMH protein. Other mutations result in a premature stop signal that leads to an abnormally short protein. Still other mutations delete regions of DNA from the AMH gene, which changes the instructions for the protein.The mutated AMH protein cannot be released from the cells of the testes or cannot bind to the receptor on the Mllerian duct cells. As a result, the Mllerian duct cells never receive the signal for apoptosis. The Mllerian duct persists and becomes a uterus and fallopian tubes. Because the AMH protein is not involved in the formation of male reproductive organs, affected males also have male reproductive organs.Cytogenetic Location: 19p13.3, which is the short (p) arm of chromosome 19 at position 13.3Molecular Location: base pairs 2,249,114 to 2,252,073 on chromosome 19 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: March 2011Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.