3
The ATP2C1 gene provides instructions for making a protein called hSPCA1. This protein is an adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-powered calcium pump, which uses energy from  ATP molecules to pump charged calcium atoms (calcium ions) across cell membranes. Specifically, the hSPCA1 protein transports calcium ions into a cell structure called the Golgi apparatus, where they are stored until needed. The appropriate storage and release of calcium is essential for many cell activities, including cell growth and division, cell movement, and attachment of cells to one another (cell adhesion).The hSPCA1 protein also transports manganese ions into the Golgi apparatus. Manganese works with a variety of enzymes and is involved in processing newly formed proteins.The hSPCA1 protein is present in cells throughout the body. It appears to be particularly important for the normal function of cells called keratinocytes, which are found in the outer layer of the skin (the epidermis).More than 100 mutations in the ATP2C1 gene have been found to cause benign chronic pemphigus, a rare skin condition characterized by red, raw, and blistered areas of skin. Mutations in this gene reduce the amount of functional hSPCA1 protein, which impairs the storage of calcium ions in the Golgi apparatus. For unknown reasons, this abnormal calcium storage affects keratinocytes more than other types of cells. Problems with calcium regulation impair many cell functions, including cell adhesion. As a result, keratinocytes do not stick tightly to one another, which causes the epidermis to become fragile and less resistant to minor trauma. Because the skin is easily damaged, it develops raw, blistered areas, particularly in skin folds where there is moisture and friction.Although ATP2C1 gene mutations probably also affect the transport of manganese within cells, abnormal manganese regulation is not thought to contribute to the signs and symptoms of benign chronic pemphigus.Cytogenetic Location: 3q22.1, which is the long (q) arm of chromosome 3 at position 22.1Molecular Location: base pairs 130,850,500 to 131,016,712 on chromosome 3 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: May 2013Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.