11
The BBS1 gene provides instructions for making a protein found in cells throughout the body. The BBS1 protein is part of a group (complex) of proteins that plays a critical role in the formation of cell structures called cilia. Cilia are microscopic, finger-like projections that stick out from the surface of many types of cells. They are involved in cell movement and many different chemical signaling pathways. Cilia are also necessary for the perception of sensory input (such as sight, hearing, and smell).More than 30 mutations in the BBS1 gene have been identified in people with Bardet-Biedl syndrome. Mutations in this gene are the most common cause of Bardet-Biedl syndrome, accounting for about one-quarter of all cases.Most BBS1 gene mutations change single protein building blocks (amino acids) in the BBS1 protein or lead to the production of an abnormally short version of the protein. The most common mutation replaces the amino acid methionine with the amino acid arginine at protein position 390 (written as Met390Arg or M390R).Mutations in the BBS1 gene likely affect the normal formation and function of cilia. Defects in these cell structures probably disrupt important chemical signaling pathways during development and lead to abnormalities of sensory perception. Researchers believe that defective cilia are responsible for most of the features of Bardet-Biedl syndrome, including vision loss, obesity, the presence of extra fingers and/or toes (polydactyly), kidney abnormalities, and intellectual disability.Cytogenetic Location: 11q13.2, which is the long (q) arm of chromosome 11 at position 13.2Molecular Location: base pairs 66,510,648 to 66,533,613 on chromosome 11 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: May 2010Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.