X
The CHM gene provides instructions for producing the Rab escort protein-1 (REP-1), which is active (expressed) throughout the body.  As an escort protein, REP-1 attaches (binds) to one of a number of Rab proteins.  Following a chemical modification, REP-1 then directs the Rab protein to the membrane of one of the cell's compartments (organelles).  While attached to the membrane, the Rab protein plays a role in directing the movement of proteins and organelles within cells (intracellular trafficking).  After the Rab protein has reached its destination, it is released by REP-1 which then attaches to another Rab protein to begin the process again.More than 140 mutations in the CHM gene have been found to cause choroideremia. Nearly all of these mutations lead to the production of an abnormally small, nonfunctional REP-1 protein. Other gene mutations result in a decrease in the protein's function or delete part or all of the gene and abolish REP-1 protein production. A lack of normal REP-1 disrupts the ability of Rab proteins to aid in intracellular trafficking. The immobility of proteins and organelles within the cell cause the cell to die prematurely.The REP-1 protein is active (expressed) throughout the body, as is a similar protein, REP-2. Research suggests that when REP-1 is absent or not functioning properly, REP-2 can perform the protein escort duties of REP-1 in many of the body's tissues.  Very little REP-2 protein is present in the light sensitive-tissue at the back of the eye (the retina), however, so it cannot compensate for the loss of REP-1 in this tissue. Loss of REP-1 function and subsequent misplacement of Rab proteins within the cells of the retina causes the progressive vision loss characteristic of choroideremia.Cytogenetic Location: Xq21.2, which is the long (q) arm of the X chromosome at position 21.2Molecular Location: base pairs 85,861,180 to 86,047,565 on the X chromosome (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: July 2013Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.