17
The CHRNE gene provides instructions for making the epsilon () component (subunit) of the acetylcholine receptor (AChR) protein. The AChR protein is found in the membrane of skeletal muscle cells and plays a critical role in the neuromuscular junction, which is the area where signaling between nerve and muscle cells occurs. Signaling between nerve and muscle cells is necessary for movement. The AChR protein consists of five subunits, each of which is produced from a different gene. The subunits are assembled into the AChR protein in the endoplasmic reticulum, a cell structure involved in protein processing and transport, before being transported to the cell membrane. There are two major forms of the AChR protein, a fetal type that is present before birth and an adult type. The  subunit is found only in the adult AChR protein. At about the 33rd week of pregnancy, the  subunit replaces the gamma () subunit (found only in fetal AChR) to form adult AChR protein.More than 90 mutations in the CHRNE gene have been found to cause congenital myasthenic syndrome. Most of these mutations replace one DNA building block (nucleotide) in the gene, but other mutations add or delete small sections of DNA. These mutations can lead to the production of an altered  subunit. A change in the  subunit leads to an increase in AChR protein signaling or a decrease in AChR protein signaling, which impairs cell-to-cell communication at the neuromuscular junction. Decreased signaling can lead to a decrease in muscle movement and cause weakness, while an increase in signaling can damage muscle cells and cause weakness. Problems with communication between nerve and muscle cells can lead to the signs and symptoms of congenital myasthenic syndrome, including muscle weakness and delayed development of motor skills such as crawling and walking. Some people with CHRNE mutations seem to have a milder course of the disease compared with other affected individuals, likely because the fetal  subunit (active at low levels after birth) can partially compensate for the lack of  subunit in the adult AChR protein.Cytogenetic Location: 17p13.2, which is the short (p) arm of chromosome 17 at position 13.2Molecular Location: base pairs 4,897,769 to 4,905,019 on chromosome 17 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: November 2011Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.