20
The COL9A3 gene provides instructions for making part of a large molecule called type IX collagen. Collagens are a family of proteins that strengthen and support connective tissues, such as skin, bone, cartilage, tendons, and ligaments. In particular, type IX collagen is an important component of cartilage.Type IX collagen is made up of three proteins that are produced from three distinct genes: one 1(IX) chain, which is produced from the COL9A1 gene, one 2(IX) chain, which is produced from the COL9A2 gene, and one 3(IX) chain, which is produced from the COL9A3 gene. Type IX collagen is more flexible than other types of collagen molecules and is closely associated with type II collagen. Researchers believe that the flexible nature of type IX collagen allows it to act as a bridge that connects type II collagen with other cartilage components. Studies have shown that type IX collagen also interacts with the proteins produced from the MATN3 and COMP genes.Genetics Home Reference provides information about intervertebral disc disease.At least three mutations in the COL9A3 gene have been shown to cause dominant multiple epiphyseal dysplasia. All of these mutations disrupt how genetic information is spliced together to make the blueprint for producing the 3(IX) chain. These mutations, called splice-site mutations, change one DNA building block (nucleotide) near an area of the gene called exon 3. These mutations in the COL9A3 gene result in the deletion of 12 protein building blocks (amino acids) from the 3(IX) chain. It is not known how mutations in COL9A3 cause the signs and symptoms of dominant multiple epiphyseal dysplasia.All identified mutations in type IX collagen delete a portion of the COL3 domain, which suggests that this region has an important function. Mutations may affect the ability of type IX collagen to fold correctly or interact with other cartilage components.Genetics Home Reference provides information about Stickler syndrome.Cytogenetic Location: 20q13.33, which is the long (q) arm of chromosome 20 at position 13.33Molecular Location: base pairs 62,817,062 to 62,841,159 on chromosome 20 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: February 2008Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.