9
The DNAI1 gene provides instructions for making a protein that is part of a group (complex) of proteins called dynein. This complex functions within cell structures called cilia. Cilia are microscopic, finger-like projections that stick out from the surface of cells. Coordinated back and forth movement of cilia can move the cell or the fluid surrounding the cell. Dynein produces the force needed for cilia to move.Within the core of cilia (the axoneme), dynein complexes are part of structures known as inner dynein arms (IDAs) and outer dynein arms (ODAs) depending on their location. Coordinated movement of the dynein arms causes the entire axoneme to bend back and forth. IDAs and ODAs have different combinations of protein components (subunits) that are classified by weight as heavy, intermediate, or light chains. The DNAI1 gene provides instructions for making intermediate chain 1, which is found in ODAs. Other subunits are produced from different genes.Genetics Home Reference provides information about heterotaxy syndrome.At least 21 mutations in the DNAI1 gene have been found to cause primary ciliary dyskinesia, which is a condition characterized by respiratory tract infections, abnormal organ placement, and an inability to have children (infertility). DNAI1 gene mutations result in an absent or abnormal intermediate chain 1. Without a normal version of this subunit, the ODAs cannot form properly and may be shortened or absent. As a result, cilia cannot produce the force needed to bend back and forth. Defective cilia lead to the features of primary ciliary dyskinesia.Cytogenetic Location: 9p13.3, which is the short (p) arm of chromosome 9 at position 13.3Molecular Location: base pairs 34,458,752 to 34,520,989 on chromosome 9 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: April 2014Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.