15
The EIF2AK4 gene provides instructions for making a protein that helps direct a cell's response to changes that could damage the cell. This protein is found in several tissues throughout the body, including blood vessel walls. The EIF2AK4 protein can turn on (activate) another protein called eIF2 alpha (eIF2), which helps control protein production. When cells are under stress, for example when the level of protein building blocks (amino acids) is too low, EIF2AK4 activates eIF2. When turned on, eIF2 stimulates processes that reduce protein production, which helps conserve amino acids. In addition, activated eIF2 can trigger production of certain proteins called transcription factors, which control gene activity. The transcription factors regulated by eIF2 control the activity of genes involved in processes that help reduce the stress on the cell.Genetics Home Reference provides information about pulmonary arterial hypertension.Mutations in the EIF2AK4 gene are the primary genetic cause of a condition called pulmonary veno-occlusive disease (PVOD); at least 22 mutations in this gene have been found in affected individuals. In PVOD, excess fibrous tissue builds up in the small vessels in the lungs that carry oxygenated blood from the lungs to the heart (the pulmonary veins). This buildup narrows (occludes) the vessels and impairs blood flow. Because blood flow through the lungs is difficult, pressure rises in the vessels that carry blood that needs to be oxygenated to the lungs from the heart (pulmonary arteries). Increased pressure in these vessels is known as pulmonary arterial hypertension.The EIF2AK4 gene mutations involved in PVOD likely lead to a complete loss of functional protein. It is not known how absence of EIF2AK4 protein function leads to the pulmonary vein abnormalities characteristic of PVOD.Cytogenetic Location: 15q15.1, which is the long (q) arm of chromosome 15 at position 15.1Molecular Location: base pairs 39,934,101 to 40,035,596 on chromosome 15 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: March 2015Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.