X
The EMD gene provides instructions for making a protein called emerin.  Although this protein is produced in many tissues, it appears to be particularly important for the normal function of muscles used for movement (skeletal muscles) and heart (cardiac) muscle.Within cells, emerin is a component of the nuclear envelope.  The nuclear envelope is a structure that surrounds the nucleus, acting as a barrier between the nucleus and the surrounding fluid (cytoplasm) inside the cell.  The nuclear envelope has several functions, including regulating the movement of molecules into and out of the nucleus.Emerin interacts with several other proteins on the inner surface of the nuclear envelope.  Together, these proteins may be involved in regulating the activity of certain genes, controlling the cell division cycle, and maintaining the structure and stability of the nucleus.  Emerin and related proteins also play a role in assembling the nucleus during the process of cell division.About 100 mutations in the EMD gene have been reported in people with Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.  Almost all of these mutations prevent cells from producing any emerin protein.  Researchers have not determined how a lack of this protein leads to the skeletal and cardiac muscle abnormalities characteristic of Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.  Studies suggest, however, that an absence of emerin could disrupt the functions of other proteins in the nuclear envelope.  These changes may alter the activity of certain genes or weaken the structure of the nucleus, making cells more fragile.In rare cases, Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy results from EMD mutations that change a single building block (amino acid) in the emerin protein.  These mutations lead to the production of an abnormal version of emerin that is unable to interact with other proteins or cannot be correctly inserted into the nuclear envelope.  This type of mutation may be responsible for some cases of Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy with unusually mild signs and symptoms.Cytogenetic Location: Xq28, which is the long (q) arm of the X chromosome at position 28Molecular Location: base pairs 154,379,237 to 154,381,523 on the X chromosome (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: June 2006Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.