19
The GAMT gene provides instructions for making the enzyme guanidinoacetate methyltransferase, which is active (expressed) mainly in the liver. This enzyme participates in the two-step production (synthesis) of the compound creatine from the protein building blocks (amino acids) glycine, arginine, and methionine. Specifically, guanidinoacetate methyltransferase controls the second step of this process. In this step, creatine is produced from another compound called guanidinoacetate. Creatine is needed for the body to store and use energy properly. It is involved in providing energy for muscle contraction, and is also important in nervous system functioning.In addition to its role in creatine synthesis, the guanidinoacetate methyltransferase enzyme is thought to help activate a process called fatty acid oxidation. This process provides an energy source for cells during times of stress when their normal fuel, the simple sugar glucose, is scarce.At least 49 mutations in the GAMT gene cause guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency, a disorder that involves intellectual disability and seizures. Most affected individuals of Portuguese ancestry have a particular mutation in which the amino acid tryptophan is replaced by the amino acid serine at position 20 in the enzyme (written as Trp20Ser or W20S).GAMT gene mutations impair the ability of the guanidinoacetate methyltransferase enzyme to participate in creatine synthesis, resulting in a shortage of creatine. The effects of guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency are most severe in organs and tissues that require large amounts of energy, especially the brain.Cytogenetic Location: 19p13.3, which is the short (p) arm of chromosome 19 at position 13.3Molecular Location: base pairs 1,397,026 to 1,401,570 on chromosome 19 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: June 2015Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.