16
The GNPTG gene provides instructions for making one part, the gamma subunit, of an enzyme called GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase. This enzyme is made up of two alpha (), two beta (), and two gamma () subunits. The alpha and beta subunits are produced from a different gene, called GNPTAB. GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase helps prepare certain newly made enzymes for transport to lysosomes. Lysosomes are compartments within the cell that use digestive enzymes called hydrolases to break down large molecules into smaller ones that can be reused by cells.GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase is involved in the first step of making a molecule called mannose-6-phosphate (M6P). M6P acts as a tag that indicates a hydrolase should be transported to the lysosome. Specifically, GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase transfers a molecule called GlcNac-1-phosphate to a newly produced hydrolase. In the next step, a molecule is removed to reveal an M6P attached to the hydrolase. Once a hydrolase has an M6P tag, it can be transported to a lysosome.At least 8 mutations in the GNPTG gene have been found to cause mucolipidosis III gamma. These mutations result in reduced the activity of GlcNAc-1-phosphotransferase, which disrupts tagging of hydrolases with M6P. Digestive enzymes that do not receive the M6P tag end up outside the cell, where they have increased activity. The shortage of these digestive enzymes within lysosomes causes large molecules to accumulate there. Conditions that cause molecules to build up inside lysosomes, including mucolipidosis III gamma, are called lysosomal storage disorders. The signs and symptoms of mucolipidosis III gamma are most likely due to the shortage of hydrolases inside lysosomes and the effects these enzymes have outside the cell.Cytogenetic Location: 16p13.3, which is the short (p) arm of chromosome 16 at position 13.3Molecular Location: base pairs 1,351,899 to 1,363,351 on chromosome 16 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: August 2009Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.