22
The GP1BB gene provides instructions for making a protein called glycoprotein 1b-beta (GPIb). This protein is one piece (subunit) of a protein complex called GPIb-IX-V, which plays a role in blood clotting. GPIb-IX-V is found on the surface of small cell fragments called platelets, which circulate in blood and are an essential component of blood clots. The complex can attach (bind) to a protein called von Willebrand factor, fitting together like a lock and its key. Von Willebrand factor is found on the inside surface of blood vessels, particularly when there is an injury. Binding of the GPIb-IX-V complex to von Willebrand factor allows platelets to stick to the blood vessel wall at the site of the injury. These platelets form clots, plugging holes in the blood vessels to help stop bleeding.To form the GPIb-IX-V complex, GPIb interacts with other protein subunits called GPIb-alpha, GPIX, and GPV, each of which is produced from a different gene. GPIb is essential for assembly of the complex at the platelet surface and helps stabilize the complex once it is formed.At least 32 GP1BB gene mutations have been found to cause Bernard-Soulier syndrome, a condition characterized by a reduced number of platelets that are larger than normal (macrothrombocytopenia) and excessive bleeding. These mutations lead to production of an altered GPIb subunit that is likely broken down too soon or that cannot get to the platelet surface. Lack of this subunit on the surface of platelets prevents formation of the GPIb-IX-V complex. Without GPIb-IX-V, platelets cannot come together at the site of an injury to form a clot, leading to the bleeding problems associated with Bernard-Soulier syndrome.Cytogenetic Location: 22q11.21, which is the long (q) arm of chromosome 22 at position 11.21Molecular Location: base pairs 19,723,543 to 19,724,774 on chromosome 22 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: June 2016Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.