5
The HARS2 gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called mitochondrial histidyl-tRNA synthetase. This enzyme is important in the production (synthesis) of proteins in cellular structures called mitochondria, the energy-producing centers in cells. While most protein synthesis occurs in the fluid surrounding the nucleus (cytoplasm), some proteins are synthesized in the mitochondria.During protein synthesis, in either the mitochondria or the cytoplasm, a type of RNA called transfer RNA (tRNA) helps assemble protein building blocks (amino acids) into a chain that forms the protein. Each tRNA carries a specific amino acid to the growing chain. Enzymes called aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, including mitochondrial histidyl-tRNA synthetase, attach a particular amino acid to a specific tRNA. Mitochondrial histidyl-tRNA synthetase attaches the amino acid histidine to the correct tRNA, which helps ensure that histidine is added at the proper place in the mitochondrial protein.At least two mutations in the HARS2 gene have been found to cause Perrault syndrome. This rare condition is characterized by hearing loss in males and females with the disorder and abnormalities of the ovaries in affected females. The HARS2 gene mutations involved in Perrault syndrome reduce the activity of mitochondrial histidyl-tRNA synthetase. A shortage of functional mitochondrial histidyl-tRNA synthetase prevents the normal assembly of new proteins within mitochondria. Researchers speculate that impaired protein assembly disrupts mitochondrial energy production. However, it is unclear exactly how HARS2 gene mutations lead to hearing problems and ovarian abnormalities in affected individuals.Cytogenetic Location: 5q31.3, which is the long (q) arm of chromosome 5 at position 31.3Molecular Location: base pairs 140,691,426 to 140,699,318 on chromosome 5 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: December 2014Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.