16
The IFT140 gene provides instructions for making a protein that is involved in the formation and maintenance of cilia, which are microscopic, finger-like projections that stick out from the surface of cells and participate in signaling pathways that transmit information within and between cells. Cilia are important for the structure and function of many types of cells, including cells in the kidneys, liver, and brain. Light-sensing cells (photoreceptors) in the retina also contain cilia, which are essential for normal vision.  Cilia also play a role in the development of the bones, although the mechanism is not well understood.The movement of substances within cilia and similar structures called flagella is known as intraflagellar transport. This process is essential for the assembly and maintenance of these cell structures. During intraflagellar transport, cells use molecules called IFT particles to carry materials to and from the tips of cilia. IFT particles are made of proteins produced from related genes that belong to the IFT gene family. Each IFT particle is made up of two groups of IFT proteins: complex A, which includes at least 6 proteins, and complex B, which includes at least 15 proteins. The protein produced from the IFT140 gene forms part of IFT complex A (IFT-A).Genetics Home Reference provides information about asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy.At least nine IFT140 gene mutations have been identified in people with Mainzer-Saldino syndrome, a disorder characterized by kidney disease, eye problems, and skeletal abnormalities. Mutations in the IFT140 gene that cause Mainzer-Saldino syndrome may change the shape of the IFT140 protein or its interactions with other IFT proteins, likely impairing the assembly of IFT-A and the development or maintenance of cilia. As a result, fewer cilia may be present or functional, affecting many organs and tissues in the body and resulting in the signs and symptoms of Mainzer-Saldino syndrome. Disorders such as Mainzer-Saldino syndrome that are caused by problems with cilia and involve bone abnormalities are called skeletal ciliopathies.Cytogenetic Location: 16p13.3, which is the short (p) arm of chromosome 16 at position 13.3Molecular Location: base pairs 1,510,427 to 1,612,108 on chromosome 16 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: May 2013Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.