3
The IL17RC gene provides instructions for making a protein that is involved in immune system function, specifically in the body's defense against a fungus called Candida. When the immune system recognizes Candida, it generates cells called Th17 cells. These cells produce signaling molecules (cytokines) called the interleukin-17 (IL-17) family as part of an immune process called the IL-17 pathway. The IL-17 pathway creates inflammation, sending other cytokines and white blood cells that fight foreign invaders and promote tissue repair. In addition, the IL-17 pathway promotes the production of certain antimicrobial protein segments (peptides) that control growth of Candida on the surface of mucous membranes.The protein produced from the IL17RC gene is present in many tissue types in the body, and is involved in cell signaling as part of the IL-17 pathway. Together with the protein produced from the IL17RA gene, it forms one of several receptors for IL-17 cytokines. Receptor proteins have specific sites into which certain other proteins, called ligands, fit like keys into locks. Certain IL-17 cytokines attach to receptors containing the IL17RC and IL17RA proteins, triggering signals that promote inflammation and the defense against Candida infection.At least three mutations in the IL17RC gene have been identified in people with familial candidiasis, an inherited tendency to develop infections caused by the Candida fungus (commonly known as yeast infections). Most people with familial candidiasis have chronic yeast infections of the skin, nails, and mucous membranes (collectively called chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis) beginning in early childhood.IL17RC gene mutations result in an absence of IL17RC receptor protein. Loss of this protein impairs binding of IL-17 cytokines and IL-17 signaling. This impaired signaling decreases production of the antimicrobial peptides and inflammatory molecules that are critical for defense against Candida, and results in the chronic infection that occurs in familial candidiasis.Cytogenetic Location: 3p25.3, which is the short (p) arm of chromosome 3 at position 25.3Molecular Location: base pairs 9,917,074 to 9,933,627 on chromosome 3 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: September 2016Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.