2
The ITGA6 gene provides instructions for making one part (the 6 subunit) of two proteins known as 64 integrin and 61 integrin. Integrins are a group of proteins that regulate the attachment of cells to one another (cell-cell adhesion) and to the surrounding network of proteins and other molecules (cell-matrix adhesion). Integrins also transmit chemical signals that regulate cell growth and the activity of certain genes.The 64 integrin protein is found primarily in epithelial cells, which are cells that line the surfaces and cavities of the body. This protein plays a particularly important role in strengthening and stabilizing the skin. It is a component of hemidesmosomes, which are microscopic structures that anchor the outer layer of the skin (the epidermis) to underlying layers. As part of a complex network of proteins in hemidesmosomes, 64 integrin helps to hold the layers of skin together.The other integrin made with the 6 subunit, 61 integrin, functions during the formation of organs and tissues before birth. The 61 integrin protein has not been as well studied as 64 integrin.At least five mutations in the ITGA6 gene have been found to cause epidermolysis bullosa with pyloric atresia (EB-PA). In addition to skin blistering, people with EB-PA are born with a life-threatening obstruction of the digestive tract called pyloric atresia. Mutations in the ITGA6 gene account for about 5 percent of all cases of EB-PA.The ITGA6 gene mutations responsible for EB-PA lead to a loss of functional 64 integrin. These mutations alter the normal structure and function of the 6 integrin subunit or prevent cells from producing enough of this subunit.  The resulting shortage of functional 64 integrin causes cells in the epidermis to be fragile and easily damaged. Friction or other minor trauma can cause the skin layers to separate, leading to the widespread formation of blisters. It is less clear how mutations in the ITGA6 gene are related to pyloric atresia.Genetics Home Reference provides information about prostate cancer.Researchers believe that both 61 integrin and 64 integrin may play critical roles in the progression of cancerous tumors called carcinomas. These cancers arise in epithelial cells and can affect many tissues and organs, including the breast, lung, liver, prostate, and skin.Changes in the location and activity of 61 integrin and 64 integrin within cancer cells are associated with the progression of carcinomas. The integrin proteins activate key signaling molecules, which trigger cancer cells to migrate through the body and invade other tissues. These signals also make cancer cells more resistant to self-destruction (apoptosis).Recent studies suggest that, in addition to their roles in the progression of existing carcinomas, 61 integrin and 64 integrin may be involved in the initial formation of these tumors.Cytogenetic Location: 2q31.1, which is the long (q) arm of chromosome 2 at position 31.1Molecular Location: base pairs 172,427,354 to 172,506,455 on chromosome 2 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: September 2009Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.