20
The JAG1 gene provides instructions for making a protein called Jagged-1, which is involved in an important pathway by which cells can signal to each other. The Jagged-1 protein is inserted into the membranes of certain cells. It connects with other proteins called Notch receptors, which are bound to the membranes of adjacent cells. These proteins fit together like a lock and its key. When a connection is made between the Jagged-1 and Notch proteins, it launches a series of signaling reactions (Notch signaling) affecting cell functions. Notch signaling controls how certain types of cells develop in a growing embryo, especially cells destined to be part of the heart, liver, eyes, ears, and spinal column. The Jagged-1 protein continues to play a role throughout life in the development of new blood cells.At least 226 mutations in the JAG1 gene have been identified in people with Alagille syndrome. Most of these mutations result in an abnormally short Jagged-1 protein that is missing the segment that normally spans the cell membrane (the transmembrane domain). Other mutations interfere with proper transport (trafficking) of the protein within the cell, preventing it from reaching the cell membrane. The loss of Jagged-1 protein at the cell membrane precludes its interaction with Notch proteins and prevents cell signaling. The lack of Notch signaling causes errors in development that result in missing or narrowed bile ducts in the liver, heart defects, distinctive facial features, and changes in other parts of the body. People with JAG1 gene mutations may have one or more of these problems. In particular, some affected individuals have a particular combination of heart defects known as tetralogy of Fallot without other signs or symptoms of Alagille syndrome.  The type and severity of problems associated with Alagille syndrome may differ even within the same family.Increased activity (expression) of the JAG1 gene has been linked to certain cancers, including breast cancer and head and neck tumors. The increased expression of the JAG1 gene may promote the development of new blood vessels that nourish a growing tumor. The altered gene expression may also enhance other cancer-related events such as cell division (proliferation) and the inflammatory response.Cytogenetic Location: 20p12.2, which is the short (p) arm of chromosome 20 at position 12.2Molecular Location: base pairs 10,637,684 to 10,674,046 on chromosome 20 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: April 2010Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.