22
The NCF4 gene provides instructions for making a protein called neutrophil cytosolic factor 4 (also known as p40-phox). This protein is one part (subunit) of a group of proteins that forms an enzyme complex called NADPH oxidase, which plays an essential role in the immune system. Specifically, NADPH oxidase is primarily active in immune system cells called phagocytes. These cells catch and destroy foreign invaders such as bacteria and fungi. NADPH oxidase is also thought to regulate the activity of immune cells called neutrophils. These cells play a role in adjusting the inflammatory response to optimize healing and reduce injury to the body.The presence of foreign invaders stimulates phagocytes and triggers the assembly of NADPH oxidase. This enzyme participates in a chemical reaction that converts oxygen to a toxic molecule called superoxide. Superoxide is used to generate several other compounds, including hydrogen peroxide (a strong disinfectant) and hypochlorous acid (the active ingredient in bleach). These highly reactive, toxic substances are known as reactive oxygen species. Phagocytes use these substances to kill foreign invaders, preventing them from reproducing in the body and causing illness.At least two mutations in the NCF4 gene have been found to cause chronic granulomatous disease. People with this disorder are at increased risk of developing recurrent episodes of infection and inflammation due to a weakened immune system. Mutations in the NCF4 gene are a rare cause of this condition. These mutations result in a decrease in functional NADPH oxidase. A shortage (deficiency) of this protein impairs the assembly or function of NADPH oxidase. As a result, phagocytes are unable to produce reactive oxygen species to kill foreign invaders, and neutrophil activity is not regulated. A lack of NADPH oxidase leaves affected individuals vulnerable to many types of infection and excessive inflammation.Cytogenetic Location: 22q12.3, which is the long (q) arm of chromosome 22 at position 12.3Molecular Location: base pairs 36,860,988 to 36,878,017 on chromosome 22 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: August 2012Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.