1
The PLOD1 gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called lysyl hydroxylase 1. This enzyme modifies an amino acid called lysine, which is one of the building blocks used to make proteins. Specifically, lysyl hydroxylase 1 converts lysine to a similar molecule, hydroxylysine, through a chemical reaction called hydroxylation. Hydroxylysine is commonly found in collagens, which are complex molecules that provide strength and support to many body tissues.Hydroxylysine is essential for collagen molecules to form stable interactions, called cross-links, with one another in the spaces between cells. The cross-links result in the formation of very strong collagen fibers.More than 30 mutations in the PLOD1 gene have been found to cause a form of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome called the kyphoscoliosis type. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is a group of disorders that affect the connective tissues that support the skin, bones, blood vessels, and many other organs and tissues. The kyphoscoliosis type is characterized by an unusually large range of joint movement (hypermobility) and severe, progressive curvature of the spine that can interfere with breathing.The most common PLOD1 gene mutation copies (duplicates) a large portion of the gene, resulting in the production of a nonfunctional version of the lysyl hydroxylase 1 enzyme. Several other mutations introduce premature stop signals that prevent the production of any functional enzyme. A loss of lysyl hydroxylase 1 activity greatly reduces the amount of hydroxylysine, which impairs cross-linking between collagen molecules. This disruption in the network of collagen fibers weakens connective tissues, causing the signs and symptoms of the kyphoscoliosis type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.Cytogenetic Location: 1p36.22, which is the short (p) arm of chromosome 1 at position 36.22Molecular Location: base pairs 11,934,667 to 11,975,542 on chromosome 1 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: November 2015Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.