13
The POLR1D gene provides instructions for making one part (subunit) of two related enzymes called RNA polymerase I and RNA polymerase III. These enzymes are involved in the production (synthesis) of ribonucleic acid (RNA), a chemical cousin of DNA. Both enzymes help synthesize a form of RNA known as ribosomal RNA (rRNA). RNA polymerase III also plays a role in the synthesis of several other forms of RNA, including transfer RNA (tRNA). Ribosomal RNA and transfer RNA assemble protein building blocks (amino acids) into functioning proteins, which is essential for the normal functioning and survival of cells.Based on its involvement in Treacher Collins syndrome, the POLR1D gene appears to play a critical role in the early development of structures that become bones and other tissues of the face.At least 20 mutations in the POLR1D gene have been identified in people with Treacher Collins syndrome, a condition that affects the development of bones and other tissues of the face. These mutations appear to alter the structure and function of the POLR1D protein, which reduces the amount of functional RNA polymerase I and RNA polymerase III in cells. Consequently, less rRNA is produced. Researchers speculate that a shortage of rRNA may trigger the self-destruction (apoptosis) of certain cells involved in the early development of facial bones and tissues. The abnormal cell death could underlie the specific problems with facial development found in Treacher Collins syndrome. However, it is unclear why the effects of a reduction in rRNA are limited to facial development.Cytogenetic Location: 13q12.2, which is the long (q) arm of chromosome 13 at position 12.2Molecular Location: base pairs 27,620,743 to 27,667,422 on chromosome 13 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: June 2012Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.