17
The RARA gene provides instructions for making a transcription factor called the retinoic acid receptor, alpha (RAR). A transcription factor is a protein that attaches (binds) to specific regions of DNA and helps control the activity of particular genes. The RAR protein controls the activity (transcription) of genes that are important for the maturation (differentiation) of immature white blood cells beyond a particular stage called the promyelocyte.The RAR protein binds to specific regions of DNA and attracts other proteins that help block (repress) gene transcription, the first step in protein production. In response to a specific signal, the repressive proteins are removed and other proteins that induce gene transcription bind to the RAR protein, allowing gene transcription and cell differentiation.Gene mutations can be acquired during a person's lifetime and are present only in certain cells. These mutations are called somatic mutations, and they are not inherited. A somatic mutation involving the RARA gene causes acute promyelocytic leukemia, a cancer of the blood forming tissue (bone marrow). Acute promyelocytic leukemia is characterized by an accumulation of promyelocytes in the bone marrow. A rearrangement (translocation) of genetic material between chromosomes 15 and 17, written as t(15;17), fuses part of the RARA gene on chromosome 17 with part of another gene on chromosome 15 called PML. The protein produced from this fused gene, the PML-RAR protein, functions differently than the protein products of the normal PML and RARA genes.The PML-RAR protein binds to DNA and represses gene transcription, like the normal RAR protein. However, the PML-RAR protein does not respond to the signal to induce transcription of genes, so the genes remain repressed.Additionally, the function of the PML protein, the product of the PML gene, is disrupted. The PML protein blocks cell growth and division (proliferation) and induces self-destruction (apoptosis) in combination with other proteins. However, the PML-RAR protein does not block proliferation or induce apoptosis.The PML-RAR protein blocks the differentiation of blood cells at the promyelocyte stage and allows abnormal cell proliferation. As a result, excess promyelocytes accumulate in the bone marrow and normal white blood cells cannot form, leading to acute promyelocytic leukemia.Cytogenetic Location: 17q21.2, which is the long (q) arm of chromosome 17 at position 21.2Molecular Location: base pairs 40,309,171 to 40,357,643 on chromosome 17 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: April 2011Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.