1
The RBM8A gene provides instructions for making a protein called RNA-binding motif protein 8A. This protein is believed to be involved in several important cellular functions involving protein production. These functions include helping to transport molecules called messenger RNA (mRNA), which serve as the genetic blueprint for making proteins. RNA-binding motif protein 8A likely carries mRNA molecules from the nucleus to areas of the cell where proteins are assembled. It may also be involved in controlling how the instructions in mRNA molecules are used to build proteins and in destroying mRNA that is defective or not needed.Mutations in the RBM8A gene cause thrombocytopenia-absent radius (TAR) syndrome. This disorder is characterized by the absence of a bone called the radius in each forearm and a shortage (deficiency) of blood cells involved in clotting (platelets).Most people with TAR syndrome have a mutation in one copy of the RBM8A gene and a deletion of genetic material from chromosome 1 that includes the other copy of the RBM8A gene in each cell. A small number of affected individuals have mutations in both copies of the RBM8A gene in each cell and do not have a deletion on chromosome 1. RBM8A gene mutations that cause TAR syndrome reduce the amount of RNA-binding motif protein 8A in cells. The deletions involved in TAR syndrome eliminate at least 200,000 DNA building blocks (200 kilobases, or 200 kb) from the long (q) arm of chromosome 1 in a region called 1q21.1. The deletion eliminates one copy of the RBM8A gene in each cell and the RNA-binding motif protein 8A that would have been produced from it.People with either an RBM8A gene mutation and a chromosome 1 deletion or with two gene mutations have a decreased amount of RNA-binding motif protein 8A. This reduction is thought to cause problems in the development of certain tissues, but it is unknown how it causes the specific signs and symptoms of TAR syndrome. No cases have been reported in which a deletion that includes the RBM8A gene occurs on both copies of chromosome 1; studies indicate that the complete loss of RNA-binding motif protein 8A is not compatible with life.Cytogenetic Location: 1q21.1, which is the long (q) arm of chromosome 1 at position 21.1Molecular Location: base pairs 145,921,556 to 145,927,536 on chromosome 1 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: October 2012Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.