19
The RGS9BP gene (which is also known as R9AP) provides instructions for making a protein called RGS9 binding protein. This protein is found in the retina, which is the specialized tissue at the back of the eye that detects light and color. Within the retina, the protein is associated with light-detecting cells called photoreceptors. As its name suggests, RGS9 binding protein interacts with a protein called RGS9 (which is produced from the RGS9 gene). It anchors the RGS9 protein to photoreceptors and stimulates RGS9's activity.When light enters the eye, it stimulates specialized pigments in photoreceptor cells. This stimulation triggers a series of chemical reactions that produce an electrical signal, which is interpreted by the brain as vision. (This process is known as phototransduction.) Once photoreceptors have been stimulated by light, they must return to their resting state before they can be stimulated again. RGS9 and RGS9 binding protein are involved in a chemical reaction that helps return photoreceptors to their resting state quickly after light exposure.At least six mutations in the RGS9BP gene have been found to cause bradyopsia, a rare condition that affects vision. In people with bradyopsia, the eyes adapt more slowly than usual to changing light conditions (for example, walking out of a darkened movie theater into daylight or driving into a dark tunnel on a sunny day). Some affected individuals also have difficulty seeing small moving objects, such as a tennis ball.The RGS9BP gene mutations that cause bradyopsia prevent RGS9 binding protein from anchoring the RGS9 protein to photoreceptor cells. The resulting loss of RGS9 protein function prevents photoreceptors from recovering quickly after responding to light. Normally they return to their resting state in a fraction of a second, but in people with RGS9BP gene mutations, it can take ten seconds or longer. During that time, the photoreceptors cannot respond to light. This delay causes temporary blindness in response to changing light conditions and may interfere with seeing small objects when they are in motion.Cytogenetic Location: 19q13.11, which is the long (q) arm of chromosome 19 at position 13.11Molecular Location: base pairs 32,675,407 to 32,678,300 on chromosome 19 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: November 2014Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.