2
The RPS7 gene provides instructions for making one of approximately 80 different ribosomal proteins, which are components of cellular structures called ribosomes. Ribosomes process the cell's genetic instructions to create proteins.Each ribosome is made up of two parts (subunits) called the large and small subunits. The protein produced from the RPS7 gene is among those found in the small subunit.The specific functions of the RPS7 protein and the other ribosomal proteins within these subunits are unclear. Some ribosomal proteins are involved in the assembly or stability of ribosomes. Others help carry out the ribosome's main function of building new proteins. Studies suggest that some ribosomal proteins may have other functions, such as participating in chemical signaling pathways within the cell, regulating cell division, and controlling the self-destruction of cells (apoptosis).An RPS7 gene mutation has been identified in at least one family affected by Diamond-Blackfan anemia. This mutation changes a single DNA building block (nucleotide) in a region of the gene called intron 3, and is written as IVS3DS+1GA. The mutation is believed to affect the stability or function of the RPS7 protein and may impair the assembly of ribosomes, but the specific effects of the mutation are not known. Studies indicate that a shortage of functioning ribosomal proteins may increase the self-destruction of blood-forming cells in the bone marrow, resulting in a low number of red blood cells (anemia). Abnormal regulation of cell division or inappropriate triggering of apoptosis may contribute to the other health problems and unusual physical features that affect some people with Diamond-Blackfan anemia.Cytogenetic Location: 2p25.3, which is the short (p) arm of chromosome 2 at position 25.3Molecular Location: base pairs 3,575,263 to 3,580,919 on chromosome 2 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: February 2012Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.