4
The SGCB gene provides instructions for making the beta component (subunit) of a group of proteins called the sarcoglycan protein complex. The sarcoglycan protein complex is located in the membrane surrounding muscle cells. It helps maintain the structure of muscle tissue by attaching (binding) to and stabilizing the dystrophin complex, which is made up of proteins called dystrophins and dystroglycans. The large dystrophin complex strengthens muscle fibers and protects them from injury as muscles tense (contract) and relax. It acts as an anchor, connecting each muscle cell's structural framework (cytoskeleton) with the lattice of proteins and other molecules outside the cell (extracellular matrix).Approximately 50 mutations in the SGCB gene have been identified in people with limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2E. Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy is a group of related disorders characterized by muscle weakness and wasting, particularly in the shoulders, hips, and limbs.Some people with limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2E also develop a heart condition called dilated cardiomyopathy. Dilated cardiomyopathy is a form of heart disease that enlarges and weakens the heart (cardiac) muscle, preventing it from pumping blood efficiently. Dilated cardiomyopathy progresses rapidly and is life-threatening in many cases.Forms of limb-girdle muscular dystrophy caused by gene mutations that affect the sarcoglycan complex are called sarcoglycanopathies. SGCB gene  mutations may prevent the sarcoglycan complex from forming or from binding to and stabilizing the dystrophin complex. Problems with these complexes reduce the strength and resilience of muscle fibers and result in the signs and symptoms of limb-girdle muscular dystrophy.Cytogenetic Location: 4q12, which is the long (q) arm of chromosome 4 at position 12Molecular Location: base pairs 52,020,695 to 52,038,319 on chromosome 4 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: April 2011Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.