2
The SMARCAL1 gene provides instructions for producing a protein whose specific function is unknown.  The SMARCAL1 protein can attach (bind) to chromatin, which is the complex of DNA and protein that packages DNA into chromosomes.  Based on the function of similar proteins, the SMARCAL1 protein is thought to influence the activity (expression) of other genes through a process known as chromatin remodeling.  The structure of chromatin can be changed (remodeled) to alter how tightly DNA is packaged. Chromatin remodeling is one way gene expression is regulated during development. When DNA is tightly packed, gene expression is lower than when DNA is loosely packed.More than 40 mutations in the SMARCAL1 gene have been found to increase the risk of Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia. The mutations associated with Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia disrupt the usual functions of the SMARCAL1 protein or prevent the production of any functional protein.  People who have mutations that cause a complete lack of functional protein tend to have a more severe form of this disorder than those who have mutations that lead to an active but malfunctioning protein.  Mutations in the SMARCAL1 gene are thought to lead to disease by affecting protein activity, protein stability, or the protein's ability to bind to chromatin.  It is not clear how SMARCAL1 mutations contribute to short stature, kidney disease, and a weakened immune system in people with Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia.  In order for people with SMARCAL1 gene mutations to develop Schimke immuno-osseous dysplasia, other currently unknown genetic or environmental factors must also be present.Cytogenetic Location: 2q35, which is the long (q) arm of chromosome 2 at position 35Molecular Location: base pairs 216,412,414 to 216,483,053 on chromosome 2 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: November 2008Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.