9
The TPM2 gene provides instructions for making a protein called beta ()-tropomyosin, which is part of the tropomyosin protein family. Tropomyosin proteins regulate the tensing of muscle fibers (muscle contraction) by controlling the binding of two muscle proteins, myosin and actin. In non-muscle cells, tropomyosin proteins play a role in controlling cell shape.-tropomyosin is found primarily in skeletal muscles, which are the muscles used for movement. This protein helps regulate muscle contraction by interacting with other muscle proteins, particularly myosin and actin. These interactions are essential for stabilizing and maintaining structures called sarcomeres within muscle cells. Sarcomeres are the basic units of muscle contraction; they are made of proteins that generate the mechanical force needed for muscles to contract.At least three TPM2 gene mutations have been identified in people with cap myopathy, a disorder that leads to muscle weakness (myopathy) and poor muscle tone (hypotonia). These mutations delete or duplicate genetic material in the TPM2 gene or replace single protein building blocks (amino acids) in the -tropomyosin protein sequence. The specific effects of these TPM2 gene mutations are unclear, but researchers suggest they may interfere with normal actin-myosin binding, impairing muscle contraction and resulting in the muscle weakness that occurs in cap myopathy.Genetics Home Reference provides information about congenital fiber-type disproportion.At least three mutations in the TPM2 gene have been found to cause distal arthrogryposis type 1, a disorder characterized by joint deformities (contractures) in the hands and feet. It is unclear how these mutations lead to contractures in people with distal arthrogryposis type 1, or why the joint problems are typically limited to the hands and feet. However, researchers speculate that contractures may be related to problems with muscle contraction that limit the movement of joints before birth.Genetics Home Reference provides information about nemaline myopathy.At least six TPM2 gene mutations have been identified in people with Sheldon-Hall syndrome, a muscle and skeletal disorder similar to distal arthrogryposis type 1 (described above) that impairs joint movement in the hands and feet. Mutations in the TPM2 gene may alter the structure of -tropomyosin and disrupt the protein's normal function in controlling muscle contractions, resulting in the contractures and other muscle and skeletal abnormalities associated with this condition.Cytogenetic Location: 9p13.3, which is the short (p) arm of chromosome 9 at position 13.3Molecular Location: base pairs 35,681,993 to 35,690,056 on chromosome 9 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: June 2015Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.