19
The TSEN34 gene provides instructions for making one part (subunit) of an enzyme called the tRNA splicing endonuclease complex. This complex helps process several types of RNA molecules, which are chemical cousins of DNA.The tRNA splicing endonuclease complex is particularly important for the normal processing of a form of RNA known as transfer RNA (tRNA). tRNA molecules help assemble protein building blocks called amino acids into full-length proteins. However, before they can assemble proteins, tRNAs must be processed into mature molecules. In particular, regions called introns need to be removed from some tRNAs for the molecules to be functional. The tRNA splicing endonuclease complex recognizes and then removes introns to help produce mature tRNA molecules.Studies suggest that the tRNA splicing endonuclease complex may also be involved in processing another form of RNA known as messenger RNA (mRNA). mRNA serves as a genetic blueprint for making proteins. Researchers suspect that the tRNA splicing endonuclease complex cuts (cleaves) one end of mRNA molecules so a string of adenines (one of the building blocks of RNA) can be added. This process is known as polyadenylation, and the string of adenines is known as a poly(A) tail. The poly(A) tail signals the stopping point for protein production and protects mRNA from being broken down before protein production occurs.At least one mutation in the TSEN34 gene has been identified in people with a disorder of brain development called pontocerebellar hypoplasia. The major features of this condition include delayed development, problems with movement, and intellectual disability. TSEN34 gene mutations cause a small percentage of all cases of a form of the disorder designated pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 2 (PCH2). When PCH2 results from TSEN34 gene mutations, it is sometimes categorized more specifically as PCH2C.The mutation that causes PCH2C replaces the amino acid arginine with the amino acid tryptophan at position 58 in the TSEN34 protein (written as Arg58Trp or R58W). This mutation impairs the function of the tRNA splicing endonuclease complex, which likely disrupts the processing of RNA molecules and affects the production of many types of proteins. Before birth, these changes appear to have the most severe impact on fast-growing tissues, such as those in the brain. However, it is unknown exactly how reduced function of the tRNA splicing endonuclease complex leads to abnormal brain development in people with this condition.Cytogenetic Location: 19q13.42, which is the long (q) arm of chromosome 19 at position 13.42Molecular Location: base pairs 54,189,517 to 54,194,536 on chromosome 19 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: November 2014Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.