X
The UBA1 gene (also called UBE1) provides instructions for making the ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1.  This enzyme is involved in a process that targets proteins to be broken down (degraded) within cells.   Protein degradation is a normal process that removes damaged or unnecessary proteins and helps maintain the normal functions of cells.Ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1 is part of the ubiquitin-proteasome system, which is the cell machinery that breaks down unneeded proteins.  The ubiquitin-proteasome system acts as the cell's quality control system by disposing of damaged, misshapen, and excess proteins. Ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1 is responsible for the first step in the ubiquitin-proteasome system; it turns on (activates) a small protein called ubiquitin.  With the assistance of other proteins, the active ubiquitin attaches to a targeted protein. When a chain of ubiquitin proteins is attached to the targeted protein, the protein is recognized and destroyed by a complex of enzymes called a proteasome.At least three mutations in the UBA1 gene have been found to cause X-linked infantile spinal muscular atrophy.  Each of these mutations changes one DNA building block (nucleotide) in the UBA1 gene.  Two of the mutations (written as 1617GT and 1639AG) are thought to lead to an enzyme with impaired function.  A third mutation (written as 1731CT) results in a decrease in the activity of the UBA1 gene, causing less of the enzyme to be produced.  Reduced levels of functional enzyme can disrupt the process of protein degradation.  A buildup of proteins in cells can cause the cell to die; the motor nerve cells that control muscle movement are particularly susceptible to damage from protein buildup.Cytogenetic Location: Xp11.3, which is the short (p) arm of the X chromosome at position 11.3Molecular Location: base pairs 47,190,800 to 47,215,128 on the X chromosome (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: December 2009Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.