14
The ZFYVE26 gene provides instructions for making a protein called spastizin, which is found in most tissues. Spastizin is important in a process called autophagy, in which worn-out cell parts and unneeded proteins are recycled within cells. Specifically, spastizin is involved in the formation and maturation of sacs called autophagosomes (or autophagic vacuoles). Autophagosomes surround materials that need to be recycled. The autophagosome then attaches (fuses) to a cell structure called a lysosome, which breaks down and recycles the materials.In addition to being involved in clearing cells of unneeded materials, spastizin also plays a role in ensuring the proper division of cells. During the final stages of cell division, spastizin participates in the process by which the dividing cells separate from one another (cytokinesis).More than 30 mutations in the ZFYVE26 gene have been found to cause spastic paraplegia type 15. This condition is characterized by progressive movement problems, intellectual disability, and vision problems. Many of the ZFYVE26 gene mutations that cause this condition result in a shortened spastizin protein that is quickly broken down. As a result, functional autophagosomes are not produced, autophagy cannot occur, and recycling of materials within cells is decreased. An inability to break down unneeded materials, and the subsequent accumulation of these materials in cells, leads to cell dysfunction and often cell death. The loss of cells in the brain and other parts of the body is responsible for many of the features of spastic paraplegia type 15.It is unclear whether a lack of spastizin protein interferes with normal cytokinesis and whether impaired cell division contributes to the signs and symptoms of spastic paraplegia type 15.Cytogenetic Location: 14q24.1, which is the long (q) arm of chromosome 14 at position 24.1Molecular Location: base pairs 67,728,892 to 67,817,293 on chromosome 14 (Homo sapiens Annotation Release 108, GRCh38.p7) (NCBI)Reviewed: April 2014Published: February 14, 2017The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users with questions about a personal health condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional.